##Fundamentals:

What is Big Data?

Big Data is A LOT of data.
Traditional systems are not capable of handling such amounts of data.

Big Data 5 Vs
Volume - a lot 
Variety - different formats, different sizes, different qualities
Value - how valuable is the information of data
Velocity - handle a lot of data frequently
Veracity - Reliability and value of data.

Types of Data
Structured Data - defined format and size.
You can use the patterns of the data in order to analyze effiiently
Ex. Social security: ###-##-####

Semi-Structured Data - defined structure, but variable size.
Ex. Text file

Quasi-Structured Data - no defined format but you can manipulate it into a usable format
Ex Clickstream data

Unstructured Data - data without structure, format, or size definition.
roughly 85 % of all data that exists
Ex. Word document, PDF, video file

Examples:
Youtube clickstream information
Netflix recommend shows that are succeeding over those that are failing

How to handle all this data?

1. Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS)
Organize data into a structure to make it useful for analysis.
This training course uses MySQL.
Good for structured data.

2. Content Management system
Data is held in a separate location such as cloud-based storage.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) S3 storage.
Good for unstructured data.

Components of Big Data:

Follow steps of ETL
Extract, Transform, Load
Extract - get data from designated source
Transform - put the data into a usable form to perform analysis
Load - put the transformed data into a system that allow you to analyze and query.

Ingestion - grab the data, requires a planned approach to address the different kinds of data that might come in.
Storage - data is made homogenous and stored in a place that is safe and nonvolatile.
Analysis - data gets sent through different tools in order to be processed into usable, valuable information.
Consumption - data and analyses are presented officially in a human-readable way, often with carts and graphs.